.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Kyle Evans <kevans@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd January 21, 2024
.Dt ORCH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm orch
.Nd Utility to orchestrate command line tools
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl f Ar scriptfile
.Op Ar command Op Ar argument ..
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility allows scripted interactions with other command line tools.
.Pp
All uses of
.Nm
follow a specific pattern: spawn a command, optionally write to its stdin, check
for patterns in its stdout.
The last two steps may be interleaved in interesting ways based on program
behavior and interaction.
When
.Nm
spawns a command, it sets up a new
.Xr pts 4
and disables input echo on it.
The command is not executed immediately, but instead waits for a release from
the user script before processing.
This is done so that the
.Ar scriptfile
may queue up some input to the program before it begins execution.
See
.Xr orch 5
for more detail on
.Nm
scripts.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl f Ar scriptfile
Uses the named
.Ar scriptfile
as the script to execute.
Specifying
.Dq -
directs
.Nm
to read the script from stdin, and is the default behavior.
.It Fl h
Show a usage statement.
.El
.Pp
If a
.Ar command
is specified, then
.Nm
will spawn it before executing the specified
.Ar scriptfile .
Execution will still be stalled until released, as described above.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.
A
.Fn match
block failing is considered an error, unless it's within a
.Fn one
block.
All blocks in a
.Fn one
block must fail to be considered an error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr expect 1 ,
.Xr pts 4 ,
.Xr orch 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Kyle Evans Aq Mt kevans@FreeBSD.org
for the express purpose of testing
.Xr tty 4
behavior.
